                           ICSE-2020
                            Grade 10
                            PHYSICS
Answers to this Paper munt be written on the paper provided
separately
You will not be allowed to write during the first 15 minutes.
This time is to he spent in reading the Question Paper.
The time green at the head of this Paper is the time allowed for
writing the answers
Section I is compulsory Attempt any four questions. from
Section II.
The intended marks for questions or parts of question , are given
in brackets [ ].
                    SECTION I (40 Marks)
Attempt all questions from this Section.
Question 1
(a) (i) Define moment of force
    (ii) Write the relationship between the SI and CGS unit of
       moment of force.
(b) Define a kilowatt hour. How is it related to joule?
(c) A satellite revolves round a planet in a circular orbit.
   What is the work done by the satellite at any instant? Give
   a reason.
(d) (i) Identify the class of the lever shown in the diagram
        below:




    (ii) How is it possible to increase the M.A of the above
     lever without increasing its length"'
 (e) Give one example of each when:
    (i) Chemical energy chasers into electrical energy.
    (ii) Electrical energy changes into sound energy
 Question 2
(a) A crane “A” lifts a heavy load in 5 seconds. Whereas another
    crane “B” does the same work in 2 seconds. Compare the
    power of crane “A” to that of crane “B”
(b) A ray of light falls normally on a rectangular glass slab.
    Draw a ray diagram showing the path of the ray till it
    emerges out of the slab
(c) Complete the path of the monochromatic light ray AB
     incident on the surface PC) of the equilateral glass prism
     PQR till it emerges out of the prism due to refraction.




(d) Where should an object be placed in front of a convex lens
    in order to get :
   (i) an enlarged real image
   (ii) enlarged virtual image?
(e) A pond appears to be 2.7 m deep. If the refractive index of
             4
    water is 3 find the actual depth of the pond

Question 3
(a) The wave lengths for the light of red and blue colours
     and nearly 7.8 x 10-7 and 4.8 x 10-7 m respectively.
    (i) Which colour has the greater speed in a vacuum?
    (ii) Which colour has a greater speed in glass?
(b) Draw a graph between displacement from mean position and
    lime for • body executing free vibration in a vacuum
(c) A sound save travelling in water has wavelength 0.4
    m Is this vase audible in air? (The speed of sound in
   water = 1400 ms-1
(d) Why does stone lying in the sun get heated up much more \
    than water lying for the same duration of time?
(e) Why is it not advisable to use a piece of copper wire as fuse
    wire in an electric circuit?
Question 4
(a) Calculate the total resistance across AB :




(b) Two metallic blocks P and Q has mg masses in ratio 2:1 arc
   supplied with the same amount of heat If their temperatures rise
    by same degree. compare their specific heat capacities.
(c) When a current carrying conductor is placed in a magnetic
    field. it experiences a mechanical force. What should be the
    angle between the magnetic field and the length of the
    conductor so that the force experienced is:
     (i) Zero
     (ii) Maximum ?
(d) A nucleus 84X202 of an element emits an alpha particle
    followed by a beta particle. The final nucleus is aYb Find a
   and b
(e) The diagram below. shows a loop of wire carrying current
     I:




  (i) What is the magnetic natant) of the loop that (aces us'
  (ii)With respect to the diagram how can we increase the
    strength of the magnetic field produced b) this loop?
                    SECTION II (4 Marks)
Attempt any question from this Section
Question 5
(a) The figure below shows a simple pendulum of mass 200 g. It
   is displaced from the mean position A to the extreme position
   B. The potential energy at the position A is Zero. At the
   position B the pendulum bob is raised by 5 m.
  (i) What is the potential energy of the pendulum at the
        position B?
  (ii) What is the total mechanical energy at point C?
  (iii) What is the speed of the bob at the position A when
        released from B? (Take g = 10 ms-2 and that is no loss
        of energy.)
(b) (i) With reference to thy direction of action how does a
    centripetal force differ from a centrifugal force during
    uniform circular motion.
      (ii) Is centrifugal force the form of reaction of centripetal
      force?
      (iii) compare the magnitude of centripetal and centrifugal
      force
(c) A block and tackle system of pulleys has velocity ration 4.
    (i) Draw a neat Labelled dare of the system indicating
    clearly the points of appliance, and direction of load and
    effort
    (ii) What will be its V.R if the weight of the movable block
      is doubled ?
Question 6
(a) A drive in water looks obliquely at an object AB in air
    (i) Dose the object appear taller, shorter or of the same size to
    the diver ?
    (ii) Show the path of two rays AC & AD starting from the tip
    of the object as it travels towards the diver in water and hence
    obtain the image of the object
(b) complete the path of the ray AB though the glass prism in PQR
    till it emerges out of the prism. Given the critical angle of the
    glass as 42o




 (c) A lens of focal length 20 cm forms an inserted image at a
   distance 60 cm from the lens.
      (i) Identify the lens
     (ii) How fax is the lens present in front of the object'
     (iii) Calculate the magnification of the image

Question 7:
(a) Give reasons for the following
    During the day:
     (i) Clouds appear white
      (ii) Sky appears blue.
(b) (i) Name the system which enables us to locate underwater
      objects by transmitting ultrasonic wares and detecting the
      reflecting impulse.
    (ii) What are acoustically measurable quantities related to pitch
        and loudness?
 (c) (i) When a tuning fork (Vibrating) is held close to ear, one hears
     a faint hum. The same (vibrating tuning fork) is held such that as
     stern is in contact with the table surface, then one hears a loud
     sound Explain
    (ii) A man standing in from of a vertical cliff fires a gun He hears
     the echo after 3.5 seconds. On moving closer to the cliff by 84 m,
     he hears the echo after 3 seconds. Calculate the distance of the
     cliff from the initial position of the man
Question 8
The diagram below shows the core of a transformer and its input
and output Connections




(i) state the material used for the core
(ii) Copy and complete the diagram of the transformer by drawing
input and output coils
 (b) (i) what are superconductors?
    (ii) Calculate the current drawn by an appliance rated 110 W,
       220 V when connected across 220 V supply.
       (iii) Name a substance whose resistance decreases with the
       increase in temperature.
(c)




  The diagram above shows three resistors connected across a
  cell of e.m.f. 1.8 V and internal resistance Calculate
      (i) Current through 3 Ω resistor.
     (ii) The internal resistance r.
Question. 9
(a) (i) Define heat capacity of a substance.
    (ii) Write the SI unit of heat capacity.
    (iii) What is the relationship between heat capacity and specific
          heat capacity of a substance?

(b) The diagram below shows the change of phases of a
    substance o n a temperature vs time graph on heating the
    substance at a constant rate
   (i) Why is the slope of CD less than slope of AB'
   (ii)What is the boiling and melting point of the substance?
(c) A piece of ice of mass 60 g is dropped into 140 g of
   water at 50oC. Calculate the final temperature of water
   when all the ice has melted. (Assume no heat is lost to the
   surrounding)
   Specific heat capacity of water = 4.2 jg-1k-1
   Specific latent heat of fusion of ice w =336jg-1

Question 10
   (a) (i) Draw a neat labeled diagram of a d.c. motor.
        (ii) Write any one use of a d c. motor
    (b) (i) Differentiate between nuclear fusion and nuclear
           fission.
       (ii) Slate one safety precaution in the disposal of
           nuclear waste.
   (c) An atomic nucleus A is composed of 84 protons and
      128 neutrons. The nucleus A emits an alpha particle and
 is transformed into a nucleus B.
(i) What is the composition of B?
(ii) The nucleus B emits a beta particle and is
     transformed into a nucleus C What is the composition
     of C?
(iii) What is mass number of the nucleus A?
(iv) Does the composition of C change if it emits gamma
     radiations?
